First continuous application post for Apply (#931)
DFE-Digital/bat-design-history: app/posts/apply-for-teacher-training/2023-06-01-changing-application-process.md

On top of this, candidates also struggle to apply again if they receive poor, or no feedback from providers and this makes them feel like they have less trust in providers.

Currently, providers have 40 working days to respond to a candidate’s application. If they do not, the applications get rejected automatically. This is the most negative experience a candidate can have in our service because most candidates expect to hear back within 2 or 3 weeks.

## What we did

The idea of allowing candidates to ‘continuously apply’ for courses had been looked at before by previous teams. We gathered previous research to see what holes we had in our knowledge so we could test some initial designs with candidates.

From this research we realised we did not have a good understanding of a candidate’s mental model around the application process. We also do not publish any information about the application process to help candidates prepare to apply for teacher training.

The hypotheses we wanted to test with this work were:

* allowing candidates to continuously apply will reduce friction and increase applications per candidate

> * candidates will add another course quicker if an application is unsuccessful

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* candidates will apply to another course sooner when an application is unsuccessful
```

### Adding courses

If a candidate had not filled out all the sections in ‘Your details’, we would show a message telling candidates they needed to do that before they could add a course.

![Screenshot showing a message that says 'You need to complete your details before you can apply to any courses'.](incomplete-details.png)

If they had completed the ‘Your details’ section, they could begin adding a course. We designed a new flow for adding a course.

![Screenshot showing content that explains users can add up to 4 courses at a time. It also explains how course can fill up quickly so the user should apply soon. After the content is a green button that says 'Add application'.](adding-applications.png)

Once a candidates starts adding their courses, we would display them like we do now, with a status attached. We’d also tell them how many courses they have left to apply to.

![Screenshot showing content that explains users can add another 3 courses to apply to. Below this is a summary card showing the first course the user has applied to.](after-application-added.png)

### Guidance on the application process

> We also added some guidance explaining the application process. We do not explain this to candidates anywhere, including on the Get Into Teaching website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also added some guidance explaining the application process. We currently do not explain this in detail to candidates anywhere, including on the Get Into Teaching website.
```

![Screenshot showing important dates and deadlines candidates should know when applying for teacher training. For example it states that applications open on 10 October 2022 and close on 17 September 2023.](new-guidance.png)

### Exploring an alternative to rejecting applications automatically

>  Once a candidate submits an application, the training provider has 40 working days to respond. If they do not, the application is rejected automatically.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Currently, once a candidate submits an application, the training provider has 40 working days to respond. If they do not, the application is rejected automatically.  
```

![Screenshot showing an application to a training provider called 2 Schools Consortium. The application is to a Chemistry course. The status of the application says 'Inactive' and explains that the candidate can apply for another course while they wait for a response on this application.](inactive-application.png)

We also tested another option where there would be no 40 working day time limit and instead we tell candidates to just withdraw the application if they have not heard anything from providers.

![Screenshot showing an application to a training provider called Alban Federation SCITT. The application is to an English course. The status of the application says 'Awaiting decision' and explains that the candidate can withdraw the application and apply somewhere else if they do not receive a response from the training provider.](waiting-for-decision.png)

## What we learnt

We now have a better understanding of candidate’s mental models when it comes to applying.

We learnt that candidates:

> * found the guidance on the application process useful so we’re looking to publish this soon

Reviewer: Drop this as it's covered in the section below?

```suggestion
* found the guidance on the application process useful
```

* preferred the option for applications to become ‘inactive’ allowing them to apply to another course

> * did not expect applications to be open all year and expected a deadline and all applications to be assessed equally

Reviewer: Might be more readable as 2 bullets?

```suggestion
* did not expect applications to be open all year
* expected a deadline with all applications submitted before the deadline assessed equally
```

* would not feel comfortable withdrawing an application unless they had received feedback on it from a training provider

> * would expect to have an outcome on all their applications before deciding on which to accept

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* would expect to have an outcome on all their applications before deciding which to accept
```

## Further considerations

We need to do more research to understand why providers do not give feedback to candidates, as this is a fundamental issue and prevents candidates from applying again.

> We’ll also be continuing to improve the designs to give candidates more flexibility when applying. We plan to launch some of the designs we tested this recruitment cycle (like publishing guidance on the application process). We’ll launch the bigger changes next recruitment cycle (like allowing applications to become ‘inactive’).

Reviewer: Split into a separate section?

```suggestion
## Next steps

We’ll continue to iterate the designs.

We plan to launch some of the designs we tested this recruitment cycle, like publishing guidance on the application process.

We’ll launch the bigger changes next recruitment cycle, like allowing applications to become ‘inactive’.
```

![Screenshot showing an application to a training provider called 2 Schools Consortium. The application is to a Chemistry course. The status of the application says 'Inactive' and explains that the candidate can apply for another course while they wait for a response on this application.](inactive-application.png)

We also tested another option where there would be no 40 working day time limit and instead we tell candidates to just withdraw the application if they have not heard anything from providers.

![Screenshot showing an application to a training provider called Alban Federation SCITT. The application is to an English course. The status of the application says 'Awaiting decision' and explains that the candidate can withdraw the application and apply somewhere else if they do not receive a response from the training provider.](waiting-for-decision.png)

## What we learnt

We now have a better understanding of candidate’s mental models when it comes to applying.

We learnt that candidates:

* found the guidance on the application process useful
* preferred the option for applications to become ‘inactive’ allowing them to apply to another course

> * understood the term ‘inactive’ and ‘awaiting decision’ but felt they were both ways to cover up that the training provider will not be giving feedback

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* understood the terms ‘inactive’ and ‘awaiting decision’ but felt they were both ways to cover up that the training provider will not be giving feedback
```
